The histories and stories in this compendium are presented in English for the convenience of a human audience. It would be very difficult, bordering on impossible, to present these accounts in their original form in a manner legible to humans, since the phonetic structures of the original languages are so different from any existing human language. The wildly varying mouth and pharynx structures among the many animalistic species of Loama led to many different and diverse languages; far more diverse than human languages on Earth, which have been constrained to a single species for all of history. Most of the languages of Loama are species-specific, and are unpronounceable to other species, humans included.

The factors discussed above lead to some interesting historical trends, including the need for languages which many different species are able to speak. The modern Camari language, for example, originated as a creole language between High Camari (a feline language spoken in the heart of the Camari Empire), and the various languages spoken at the edge of the empire among various diverse taxonomic groups. The result was a compromise language which was mutually pronounceable among many different species. All sapient species are able to pronounce the Camari language at minimum, and most species are capable of speaking it to a high degree of fluency. While most species would prefer to speak native languages among their own species, Camari was an attractive language for commerce, leading to its near-ubiquitous status throughout the archipelago.

There are several other contemporary pan-species languages that are worth noting. Perhaps the most prominent of these aside from Camari is the Volkovian language. This tongue was constructed by a team of scholars appointed by the Tsar starting in 821, to serve as a unifying language among all the subjects of the Volkovian Empire. The base language was a wolf dialect, which was modified to be widely pronounceable. The phonetic restraints eventually led to a very similar phonology to Camari, albeit with very different morphology and syntax.

It is common for people in the Archipelago to have two names: the first being a native name in their species' language, and the second as an exonym for conversation with other species. These names are typically from one of several pan-species Lexicons, which very by region, and often island to island. Depending on the species diversity of the community a child is brought up in, their exonym may be chosen for them at a very young age. Alternately, In communities composed of a single species, or closely related group of species, an exonym is not required, and individuals may choose their own exonym later in life as need arises. In many cases, an exonym may be the same, or very similar to a native name, depending on how coherent a native name is to other species.

The unique names of individuals, locations, and named objects in these accounts have been changed in order to be comprehensible by human readers. Though many creative liberties were taken for unique names, care was also taken to preserve word-play when relevant to the narrative. For example, Wulf Delmar's native first name in its original form in the Sea Otter language corresponds closely to the Camari word for wolves (Although this was unknown to his parents, who did not speak Camari when Wulf was born). As a result, he chose to use the Camari word for wolf directly as his exonym. To follow this feature of his name, I have chosen a Wolf/Wulf connection for this translation, which I believe is most appropriate in this case. However, other translators may instead opt for options outside of English, such as "Luke/Lucas" to correspond with the Greek "Lykos."

